find 90% of it noise. I don't mean literal noise,
but I mean stuff you can't use. I lecture the same
way. I never stick to the point. Well, is it
rolling? It wouldn't be Pilgrimage. Not that I
don't like the story. I do. But I'm ashamed of
having written it. And the reason is that
Pilgrimage is about my wife's hometown.
Jefferson. And the image that comes out there and
the satire, irony, whatever you want to call it,
represents a view that I don't hold any longer. And
I caused some unhappiness to people in Jefferson
who read that story. I guess this is an age-old
problem for a writer. But there were people that I
liked. and people that I would not willingly have
insulted for the world. And those people have
always been very kind to me, so I do have this
ambivalent feeling about it. I like this story,
but in a way, I wish I'd never written it. And I
didn't mean it quite as harshly as I think it came
out in print. You know, I was having fun, and there
are some funny things about Jefferson. But you get
older, and you have children of your own, you get to
the point where you catch yourself thinking,
well, you know, if I had to pick a place where I'd
like my kids to grow up, I could do a lot worse than
Jefferson, and I'd feel rather more comfortable
with them growing up there than here in Austin. So
there's that. That doesn't answer your question.
You like different stories for different
reasons, and I suppose to some extent it depends on
what day you catch a writer and which one you like.
But I guess ones that more or less stick in my mind
that I'm fond of, for one reason or another, would
probably be Artifact, which is a long and short
story, but it is technically a short story. And
probably didn't he ramble. It's the jazz story, as
far as short stories go. I don't know. You ask me
tomorrow, I'm going to choose two of them. That's
always a problem. I think a stick for Harry
Eddington is a good story, too. But I don't know.
It's very difficult to judge your own stuff. I've
enjoyed most all of your things that have been said
in Africa, or revolving in that area in
particular. Thanks. And far from this earth,
particularly like myself. Thank you. This is one
of the top. I'm happy to hear it, not so much because
it's set in Africa, but simply because it's one of
my later things. You know, you like to think you're
getting better. And I don't have anything like as
much time to write as I wish I did, and I haven't been
very prolific since I've been fouled up with being
chairman. And hopefully all that's going to end
soon and I can get back to it. But I think I've
learned a few things. I hope I have. I know Dick
Matheson always used to be terrible, you know. The
first story he ever wrote was Born a Man and Woman,
and apparently it's the only one anybody ever
remembered, because whenever anybody would meet
Dick, you know, they would say, oh, how I enjoyed
Born a Man and Woman, and he's gotten to the point he
just hates to hear about it, because, you know, the
implication is that you haven't written a damn
thing since that anybody wants to read. Yeah,
that's true. I hate that. but I'd like to ask the
same question about your noveling. Novel or
novelette? Novel. Noveling really is... You're
going to say artifying boarded right into the
novelette category. It does shade into it. Well,
it wouldn't be my favorite novelette. I was
counting it as a short story. I don't know what my
favorite novel is. I've written, I guess, more
novelettes than short stories. Favorite
novel... There's not a whole lot of room for choice
here. Like liquid bibliography?
Well, I suppose you can kind of tackle it in
reverse.
I like Unearthly Neighbors least of my own novels.
That's not my title, by the way. I hate the title.
Maybe that is one thing that puts me off. I called
that Shoulder of the Sky. It's from Hausman. And it
got changed because some guy had written a book
about the Air Force that came out right about the
same time called Shoulder of the Sky. So Valentine
just stuck Unearthly Neighbors on it, which I
think is just a ghastly title. If you'll notice, if
my memory's not playing tricks on me, Unearthly
Neighbors is the only one of my novels, science
fiction novels, that's not very solidly rooted in
the present. I'm not sure how much I've done this as
a conscious policy, or whether it's just worked
out that way. But all others have been. They're
either set in the present, or they begin in the
present, or they touch the present pretty closely
one way or another. And this is not true of
unearthly neighbors. And I suspect that's one
reason I'm less fond of it. It's harder for me to get
a degree of reality into a story. If I don't have a
touchstone, I don't know quite how, I don't even
know what I'm trying to say exactly, except that I
like science fiction that's not too far out and
that has something that's recognizable, not just
to other people, but to me. So the thing is meaning,
but anyway, I like that one the least. I think that
you can eliminate Miss Sedan simply because it's a
juvenile. I had some fun with that, by the way. They
had a directive when I wrote that. Forgive me, am I
going on too long about something you don't give a
damn about? I remember there was kind of a formula
you were supposed to write that book to for that
whole series. Every chapter was supposed to end on
a shattering climax, you know, that would make Joe
Blow age 14, rip on through the know, and I
compromised. And if you'll notice in Miss Adonna,
not consistent, but frequently, I alternate
chapters in which there's one chapter that's all
plot and cliffhangers, and then there's one for
me. And so more or less... Every other chapter in
there is one that I wrote because I wanted to write
it, and the next one is there for the story. But we
could eliminate that one. You know, pretty soon
we'll be down where there aren't any. I think The
Winds of Time is a mixed bag in that there's some
things I like very much in The Winds of Time, and
there are other things that I don't care for too
much. So we can eliminate that one. And that leaves
us with, what, three?
I don't know.
I guess I like Shadows in the Sun, but saying that,
what it really means is that it's somewhat closer
to me than the others. I have not gone back and
re-read it. I'm sure that if I went back and re-read
it, there are lots of things I wouldn't care for
about it. But I like the wolf as my brother, and I
like the shores of another city. So I don't know. If
I were forced to pick, I guess it would be between
shadows in the sun and the wolf as my brother. But I
don't know. One was your first venture in the
general market, and the other one the prize
market. That's right. Not that winning prizes
says anything. Worked a long time on that book. I
know which of the two is Dr. McAllister's
favorite.
I started writing Wolf is My Brother before I left
for Africa. And I wrote a fair amount of it in Africa
in the evenings, and sometimes when it was raining
so hard I couldn't get out. You may remember it from
the shores of another ship. I sometimes think my
Comanches sound more like convo than anything
else. I did, I spent a good five years on it. And I
spent a good three years on Shores of Another Sea. I
don't mean constantly, but I mean that's what I was
working on and what you're, what finally came out
is radically different from what I started with.
Started out as a straight and all. Dr.
McAllister told me the story that His copy of The
Wolf is My Brother just suddenly appeared on his
doorstep, so to speak. He was unaware that it was in
progress. He'd been chastising you for years to
get away from that silly science fiction and write
something serious. Well, I don't recall that
specifically. I remember talking about the
science fiction. Everybody does. What do you
waste your time writing that stuff? I get that all
the time. It doesn't deter me in the least. But
I never talk about things when I write them.
I realize this sounds terribly superior and smug
and all that. Forgive me, I don't mean to sound that
way. In my experience, there are two kinds of
writers, maybe three kinds. But broadly
speaking, you've got the talking writers and the
writing writers. And in my experience, the guys
that spend all their time talking about what
they're going to do and what they're doing, very
seldom write anything. And I find it very hard. It
goes dead on me if I talk about it when I'm doing it.
Because whatever it is that you're trying to get
down on a piece of paper and it makes you want to
write the thing in the first place, it can get
dissipated in telling somebody about it. I mean,
after all, that's what you're doing when you're
writing the story. But I never talk about it. And I
very seldom talk about anything I've written
either, unless somebody comes in and asks me
point-blank. It's not that I'm secretive. On the
other hand, I have known writers. Chuck Beaumont
was one, who was always full of what he was writing
right then. And I had to talk about it, and couldn't
wait to rip a page out of the typewriter and read it
to you, you know, whether the thing was finished or
not. I've just never been... Yes. The
collaborations with him carry this tone with
them, I think. We had more fun doing those stories
than anything I've ever written. I've never been
able to collaborate really with anybody else.
There was a story that came out with my byline and
Garvin Berry's on it. You may have noticed a very
early story in Super Science called The Blood
Star, not my title either, and not Garvin's. But he
didn't write it. What had happened there was we'd
kicked it around together for a long time, and part
of the plot was his. And I thought it was only fair to
stick his name on it, but actually Chuck's the only
one I've collaborated with. And just on that one
kind of story, and we just had a ball. Everything he
wrote just knocked me out. And we did it in
sections, you know. He would sit down and write
thousand words, you know, and give it to me, and
then I'd read that and I'd type the next thousand.
And he really broke me up. I can remember both of
them. We just, it was one of those happy things
where we each amused the other. And I remember
taking his section of manuscript and reading it
and actually falling out of the chair laughing,
you know, and then going down and trying to do
likewise. It was great fun. There's one other of
those stories that we wrote that was never
published, and I don't know what happened to it. I
don't know. It got lost somewhere when Chuck died.
It was called The Rest of Science Fiction. And we
took all the plots that we hadn't been able to
dispose of in the last word and I clubbed and took
care of the rest of them. I remember nothing about
it except a lot of it was horror fiction. And I
remember the protagonist was the, let's see, how
did that go? It was the beautiful scientist and his
mad daughter, which we thought was a fairly good
switch. But that's all I remember. It was great
fun. I miss Chuck terribly. He was a wonderful guy.
Met a terrible death. I thought, one of these awful
things where you talk about a man getting trapped
in his own plot, rather like a Lovecraftian sort of
notion. I can never remember the name of the
disease, but Chuck was the same age I am. It's this
premature aging and senility syndrome, whatever
it is. I forget the last time I saw Chuck before he
died. His hair had turned snow white. His face was
all lime. His hands were palsied. He could feel it
coming on. Toward the end, he was just a vegetable.
He couldn't even say yes or no. Perfectly harmless
and kind of being a wonderful talented guy. I could
tell you lots of stories about Beaumont, but I
guess that's not what you want. Wasn't his real
name anyway. Seems to be fairly common. But Chad
Oliver's mother. Yeah. His real name was Nutt,
Charles Nutt, N-U-T-T.
It's very indicative of the kind of guy he was that
he would pick a name like Beaumont. He was, even
when he was desperately poor, he was very
flamboyant, you know, only had one decent suit of
clothes to his name, but it had a flashy red vest.
And when he really got hungry, he used to go down,
you know, not to some hamburger joint or anything,
he'd pick out the finest restaurant in Los
Angeles. demand to see the manager and say, sir, I
am Charles Beaumont, struggling young writer. If
you stake me to a meal one day, you will be famous.
And he was never turned down. I wonder if he could
get away with it now. I don't want to be curious. But
he sure got away with it. It was a long time
ago. Give me another question. I'm running now.
Were there any other writers, I assume that
Beaumont and Nolan both you met, first met while
you were out on the coast? That's right. Are there
any other writers or science fiction
personalities with whom you got acquainted out
there? Yeah, I knew Richard Matheson quite well.
Dick and I had never met and we were both writing for
fantasy and science fiction, carrying him side by
side. And at that time, as I said, I didn't know
Dick, and had no idea that he never read science
fiction, didn't care anything about it. So I read a
story of his that really impressed me, and I
thought, well, gosh, here's this guy right here in
Los Angeles. I'll just call him up. And I did. Got
him on the phone, and I said, hi, Dick, this is Chad
Oliver. It was this long silence, and then the
single word He had never heard of me. He had no idea
who I was. So I went over and explained who I was and
we got to be very close friends. Apart from those,
from Dick and Chuck and Bill, the only other ones
were Bradbury, whom I knew fairly well. We
certainly were never as close as Chuck and I and
Bill, who were all more or less struggling
M-Riders at a time that Bradbury had already
arrived. tended to be rather paternal in his
attitude toward young upstarts, which is not a
fair statement. He's a very generous kind of a guy.
And I knew Van Boot and some of the old timers out
there like Ross Rocklin, Stu Byrne. They were all
over the place, but I didn't know them well. And
aside from those, actually the only writers that I
know at all well are Walt Miller and and Randall
Garrett, who spent a year
here. There are others that I know casually, but
not that I've ever spent a lot of time with. You're
still a member of SFWA. Whether or not you're very
active, I don't know. But I see you mentioned in
connection with any membership work that they're
doing. We can't keep people like Chad Oliver out.
That's right. Where did you see that, or did you? I
picked this up, I can't cite the source right off
the top of my head, perhaps the last bulletin.
Gosh, I must have missed that one. This is just a
guess, but they were talking about someone had to
publish within the last, in X number of years,
which you're going to qualify now. Yeah, I'm
qualified. Thank you. I hadn't published
anything in several years. Yeah, I've been a
member, and have not at all been active. It really
boils down to paying my dues. They asked me to run
for president several years ago when I declined.
There's just no way in the world that I could be
president. I mean, not that I'd get elected, but
even if I did, at the same time that I'm chairman,
it's just been awesome. I can understand that.
But, yeah, I'm a member. Seems like a good
organization. Yeah, if it doesn't... come apart
at the seams with factionalism and a lot of
quarreling about things that aren't really
important. There is a danger in that. There isn't
any organization of that type, but on balance,
yeah, I think it's good. There's a new one which you
may not have come across yet. The Science Fiction
Research Association has been formed. Yes, I
have. heard something about it, and somebody sent
me some material on it. Because I recall that's the
one that cost some astronomical sum to join here.
Three bucks? Twenty bucks. Twenty bucks. Which,
the last information I had, at least, indicates an
interest in science fiction on what you might term
the scholarly level, which again seems to be a...
I'm also a member of a... Western Writers of
America for what that's worth. Rather more of an
organization I fear.
I'm not an organization man. I don't join things. I
don't like meetings and I hate conventions. I'm
one of these odd people where if I ever do get some
spare time I'm down on the stream trout fishing.
These organizations indicate an academic
interest in science fiction. Do you think this is
good for the field? I'd be real curious.
I'm not sure what you mean by good for the field.
What I really think is that it's inevitable
in lots of ways. If
only on one elementary level. I've always felt in
my prejudiced manner that for a fairly
specialized, even coterie type of writing, a lot
better writing in science fiction than in almost
any other comparable field that I know anything
about. And that's been true for many, many years.
And the utter contempt with which it was received
by outside critics, I don't know how much effect it
had on the field, but it certainly hurts if you're a
writer. to always have what you write simply
ignored or, well, usually ignored. It wasn't that
it was condemned, really, or torn apart by some
savage critic. It's just as though it didn't
exist. And there was a lot of writing in that period
when we were being consistently ignored by
everybody. It was a damn sight better than the kind
of thing that everybody was flipping over. And I
think it's still true. There's a definite
tendency in this culture Films, books,
everything. There's a sort of masterpiece of the
week club in which I've gotten to the point I never
go see a film anymore where somebody has found some
review that says, this will revolutionize motion
pictures. It's the greatest film in the last five
years. It's always crap. And the same way with the
novels and the novelists who are the darlings of
the critics for six months or something and you
never hear of them again. There were lots of things
that were being done that should have received
more attention than they did. But how much effect
it actually has on the writing of science fiction
is something else. I think you could even argue it
the other way. That maybe there was an advantage in
writers writing science fiction because they
loved it and simply tried to do the best job they
could without worrying about what some critic was
going to say. There's always a danger in writing
for the critic, any critic. It's the worst mistake
you can make. You've no doubt read the SFWA
round-robin criticism. Who needs it? I've
thumbed through it. I think this was the genesis of
the question. People don't understand science
fiction. They still don't understand science
fiction. Most criticism of science fiction, I
think, has the wrong target anyhow. So much of it,
you know, come back to what you're talking about in
the article you're writing. The idea is that the
one form of science fiction that's respectable is
some variant of the utopian novel, the social
satire, or something of that kind. And in large
part, this is purely a personal crotchet of mine,
but it's the aspect of science fiction that
interests me the least. other types of science
fiction that are aimed at a different target don't
get the same reception, whether you're talking
about Childhood's End or More Than Human or
Mechanical for Leibowitz or whoever. Science
fiction, you know, it's essentially a literary
technique. What it is, it's a way of telling a
story. And you can write any kind of story as
science fiction, I think.
Joanna Russ, I believe, I hate to cite her
specifically, but I've seen a lot of big-name
science fiction people mention about the
academic interest in science fiction. By and
large, what it is, do those academics keep their
hands the hell out of our literature? This is the
genesis of the question and what was behind it.
Well, I wouldn't agree with that. As I say, I think
it's inevitable. I mean, here it is. If it exists,
it ought to be studied, and what harm can it do? As
long as we don't take it too seriously. That's the
danger.
I believe you have written an article on the nature
of science fiction that appeared in one of the
fanzines.
Inside an SF advertiser sometime in 1955. Oh gosh,
I'd forgotten about that. What is science
fiction? Yeah, I did. It was a long time. I'm sorry I
don't remember a thing about it. I'll try to get my
hands on it. I dimly recall writing it, and I hadn't
thought about it in years. Yeah, I did. You're
right. What about, did you write much for the
fanzines? No. On that nature? No. There were a few
things, and that was some I've forgotten.
I wrote a thing, I remember, on Ray Bradbury for
that book. What was it called? It was a one-shot,
finely done thing called the Ray Bradbury Review
or something that Bill Mullen put out years ago and
asked me to write an article for, which I did. And
then I did that thing that you mentioned, and there
are probably a few others, but I don't remember
what they were. I've never been much involved with
the fan magazines, really. except for publishing
my own one time. A one-shot. Garvin Berry and I put
out one called The Moon Puddle. One issue. The Moon
Puddle.
Variant of The Moon Puddle by A. Murray. We had a lot
of fun with it, but we never really intended it to be
a series or anything. We just ran all 50 copies,
which are priceless collector's items. Dr.
Manick has got. I don't know where my copy is. We
wrote the whole thing. Well, I take it back. We
wrote all of it except one article that David H.
Keller submitted at that period where he was
submitting everything to all of them. I had an
article in there about Edgar Rice Burroughs and
Garvin had a perfectly marvelous thing on Henry
Kuttner in which he set out to try to track down
every pen name that Henry Kuttner ever used, which
was an Olympian undertaking. I knew Kuttner also,
I forgot. Fascinating kid. You never did write any
pseudonym, did you? Did you always use your own
name? Does that tell me the question? No, I was just
trying to remember if I ever had. I don't think so.
If I did, I don't recall. never had any reason. I
mean, after all, I'm not that prolific. That's
primary reason for the pseudonyms at that point.
It was in the old days, where it just looked awkward
to have a contents page that had been entirely
written by one individual, although sometimes
they did that, you know, more or less as a gimmick. I
remember, I think Don Wilcox wrote a whole issue of
Amazing Stories one time, but it was done actually
for two reasons. One, to avoid the argument, well
he can't be any good if he writes that. And the other
people who had radically different styles, and
they wanted to keep them separate, and that
definitely was a factor with Kuttner. He wrote
totally differently as Henry Kuttner and as Lewis
Padgett, for example. And for a long time, nobody
knew who Lewis Padgett wrote. And then he and his
wife, C.L. Moore, collaborated on a number of
things and used some other name. What was that?
Lawrence O'Donnell. I don't know what the name
was. Whatever it was. But he had a whole raft of
them. Keith Hammond was another one. A number of
these people have unbelievable variety of
suitors. The guy that amazes me is Paul Anderson.
He is so prolific. And the quality is so high. And
he's been doing it for so long. That is amazing.
Yeah. There are lots of writers that have creative
spurts and turn out a number of really fine things
within a fairly short period of time and then more
or less tail off and just dribble out a story.
Ted Sturgeon, to a degree, is like that. He's
written very little really lately, at least that
I'm aware of. And these fantastic creative
explosions like Heinlein had at one time, again
under a variety of different managers. But
somebody that can sustain it over the years, like
Pohl does, is really amazing. I knew him, too. I
forgot. Not
well. Pohl lived in Berkeley. And several times
when I went up to talk to Boucher, I'd get together
with Pohl or Meyer very much, which is probably
obvious. I enjoy reading much of his material.
I've got a new to me paperback that he's written.
Yeah, it's the kind of thing where there are not too
many Paul Anderson stories that you can look back
on and say, boy, that's the greatest thing I ever
read. But on the other hand, there are very few
you'll ever read that you put down and say, boy,
that's a total waste of time, a real stinker. He's a
real pro, is what they've done. That's true, too. I
have a curiosity. Have you read Heinlein's new
contribution? No. I saw it. in the serial version
in what, Galaxy? I read something about it
somewhere, just one comment that I have not read.
In fact, I haven't read a fair amount of it over the
later Heinlein. I'm ashamed to say I've read
Stranger in a Strange Land and I've read The Moon is
a Harsh Mistress. And I think that's about all
fairly recent. I guess it's not really recent to
you, Heinlein. So isn't this the one about the sex
switch? It's a brain transplant, basically what
it is. Coupled with a sex switch, I guess you could
say. Getting good. I wouldn't read it again if I had
my choice. It has received uniformly poor
reviews. Well, maybe there's something to it.
It's an interesting thing. I think he was going
around experimenting a bit himself. Well,
there's a guy who I think contributed a tremendous
amount to science fiction, particularly in terms
of technique. During that one period where
Heinlein was really turning them out, both as
Heinlein and as Anson MacDonald, I think it would
be very hard to point to any comparable what was it,
three-year period by any one writer in which so
many knew.